Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on order and ranking.
Let's decode this concept like detectives.
Concept explanation.
So what is this order
and ranking all about?
You ask array.
It's a topic in reasoning ability.
That's all about figuring out who is
standing where in a line, or who is
taller, shorter, fatter, thinner, or
has more marks than Shama, you son.
You are given certain clues and you have
to become a bit of a Sherlock Holmes
to deduce the correct order position
From all the information provided.
It involves understanding concepts like
rank from the top or bottom left or
right, the total number of people and the
number of people between two individuals.
This topic truly tests your ability to
analyze and interpret relative positions
and all those hidden relationships.
Real world relevance.
Now, you might be thinking, sir, where
will I ever use this in the real world?
Well, for an officer, these
skills are absolutely pure gold.
They enhance your logical thinking
and data interpretation, which are
vital for analyzing financial data and
even managing long customer queues.
This helps in efficient Q Management
helps in prioritizing important tasks,
allocating resources wisely, evaluating
performance, and most importantly,
making quick and very well-informed
decisions when it matters the most.
It's the secret sauce for
real world efficiency.
Breakdown of question types.
Let's talk about what kind of
questions you can expect in your
exam based on past patterns.
The blueprint is quite clear about
30, 35% of the time, they will
ask you to find the total number
of persons in a row or column.
This is where they give you one
person's position from both hands.
Then with a 20, 25% chance, you'll
see questions on the position
of a person from the other end.
Where you know the total and one rank.
Next up with 15 to 20% frequency
is finding the number of persons
between two persons a classic, another
favorite appearing 10 to 15% of the
time involves interchanging positions.
You know, Ram becomes
sham and Sham becomes ram.
What happens next?
And finally, about 10 to 15% of questions
are comparison based, ranking, arranging
people by height, weight marks, or age.
So you should prepare accordingly.
My friend.
Formulas plus tricks.
All right, let's get to the magic spells,
the formulas and tricks for finding
the total number of persons when you
know one person's rank from both sides.
Just remember this.
Total equals rank from left,
plus rank from right minus one.
Why minus one?
Because you counted the poor fellow twice.
Simple, right.
To find the rank from the
other end, you just do total
minus the known rank plus one.
It is like looking at the
entire line from the other side.
Now, finding the number of persons
between two persons has two scenarios.
If it's a non-overlapping case,
meaning the total is greater than
the sum of their ranks, the number
of people between them is simply the
total minus the sum of their ranks.
But if it's an overlapping case where
the sum of the ranks is more than the
total, the formula is a bit tricky.
It's the sum of their ranks
minus the total, and then
you must subtract two more.
These two are the people themselves
and for interchanging positions,
the total is the new position of the
first person, plus the old position
of the second person minus one.
The number of people between
them is just the difference in
positions of one person minus one.
Got it.
Good.
Methods of solving.
Now, knowing the formulas is
one thing, but applying them
correctly is the real game.
So here is the step-by-step method for
calculating photo persons in a row.
First hunt down that one person whose
rank is given from both left and right.
Add those two ranks, and please
for my sake, remember to subtract
one from the sum for finding a
person's rank from the other end.
Note down the total number
of people and the given rank.
Subtract the given rank from
the total and then just add one.
That is your answer when finding
persons between two individuals.
First, you must diagnose the situation.
Is it overlapping or non-overlapping?
If the sum of the ranks from
opposite ends is less than the
total, it's non-overlapping,
if it's more, it's overlapping.
For the non-overlapping case, subtract
the sum of the ranks from the total
for the overlapping case, subtract the
total, and two from the sum of the ranks.
Easy peasy for interchanging positions.
Always, always draw a little diagram.
Use the new position of one
person and the old position of
the other to find the total.
The difference in the positions of the
person who moved will tell you how many
people are between them, minus one.
And finally, for comparison based
problems, think like a mathematician,
represent every clue as an inequality,
like a greater than B, C, less than B.
Then combine these little clues
to build the full sequence.
Be very careful and read what is
actually being asked in the question.
Shortcuts plus smart techniques.
Every master has some special tricks
up their sleeve, and you should too.
First, visual representation.
Always draw a simple line mark the people.
This little drawing will
save you from big confusions.
It helps you see the
problem much more clearly.
Second, focus on relative positioning.
Instead of finding exact numbers,
sometimes just knowing A is
five places to the right of B
is enough to crack the problem.
Third, use option elimination
in multiple choice questions.
If an answer looks completely
impossible, just throw it out.
Why waste time on it?
Fourth, focus on the key information.
Find that one clue that unlocks
the whole puzzle, like one
person's position from both ends.
And finally, practice with diagrams.
The more you draw, the
faster you will get.
It builds your intuition, my friend, and
speed common mistakes and misconceptions.
Now let us talk about the
banana peels on the floor.
The common mistakes so many people
make the most classic blunder is
forgetting to subtract one when
calculating the total people get
excited, add the ranks and move on.
Don't be that person.
Another big trap is incorrectly
calculating between.
You must know if it's an overlapping
or non-overlapping case before
you use a formula blindly.
Also, people confuse between, with
including the word between means
you don't count the two people at
the ends, and please, when you draw.
Be consistent with your left right.
It should be from the perspective
of the people in the row, not
your own left and right, and
don't just blindly apply formulas
without understanding the context.
A formula is a tool, not a magic wand.
Lastly, do not ignore
answers like zero or one.
Sometimes the number of people between
two individuals is indeed zero.
It's not a trick question.
WH framework summary.
So to wrap up the theory,
let's use the WH framework.
What are we doing here?
We are determining the position
or rank of individuals or objects
in a sequence or an arrangement.
Why are we doing this?
Because it is absolutely essential
for logical reasoning and problem
solving in competitive exams.
When do we apply this skill?
We apply it whenever we are given
clues about relative positions,
total counts or specific
arrangements that need to be deduced.
Where is it used?
It is used in your exam, in
logical puzzles, and any place
that needs sequential analysis.
Who needs this?
Every friend preparing for government
exams, professionals who need sharp
analytical skills and basically anyone
who enjoys solving a good, logical puzzle.
And how do we solve these?
By using our special formulas,
drawing neat diagrams, and applying
sharp, logical deduction based on
the given positional information.
Fully worked out.
Examples.
Enough theory.
Let's get our hands
dirty with some examples.
Example, one total number of persons
question in a row of friends.
Rohan is 15th from the left end,
and 20th from the right end.
How many friends are
there in the row options?
A 34 B, 35 C 36.
D 37.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution.
Step one.
First, understand the problem.
We have Rohan's position from
both the left and right end.
We need the total number of friends.
Step two, apply the formula.
The formula is total equals rank from
left, plus rank from right minus one.
Step three, substitute the given values.
Rohan's rank from the left is
15 and from the right is 20, so
total equals 15 plus 20 minus one.
Step four, calculate the total.
Total equals 35 minus
one, which equals 34.
Therefore, there are 34 friends
in the row, correct answer, A 34.
Example, two interchanging positions.
Question in a row of girls.
Rena is 10th from the
left and Tina is 15th.
From the right, if they
interchange their positions,
Rena becomes 16th from the left.
What is Tina's new position?
From the right end options, a 20th B 21st,
C 22nd, D 23rd understand the question
before moving to explanation solution.
Step one.
Let's note the initial positions.
Rena is 10th from the left and Tina is
15th from the right Step two after the
swap, Rena is now where Tina was Rena's.
New position from the left is 16th.
Step three, let's find
the total number of girls.
The formula is total equals Rena's.
New position from left, plus Tina's
old position from right minus one.
So total equals 16 plus 15 minus one.
This gives us 31 minus one,
which means there are 30 girls.
Step four.
Now let's find Tina's new position.
From the right, Tina is now at Rena's
old spot, which was 10th from the left.
Using the formula rank from right
equals total minus rank from left
plus one, we get 30 minus 10 plus one.
Which is 20 plus one.
So Tina's new position
is 21st from the right?
Correct.
Answer, B 21st.
Example, three persons between
two individuals question
in a row of 50 friends.
P is 12th from the left end, and
Q is 18th from the right end.
How many friends are sitting between P
and Q options A 19 B, 20 C, 20 1D 22?
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Step one, let's list what we know.
Total friends equals 50 peace
position from left equals 12 Q's
position from right equals 18th.
Step two, let's check for overlapping.
Some of positions equals
12 plus 18, which is 30.
Since the total 50 is
greater than the sum 30.
This is a non-overlapping case.
They don't cross each other.
Step three.
Now we apply the simple formula
for non-overlapping cases, which
is persons between equals total
minus sum of ranks, so persons
between equals 50 minus 12 plus 18.
That becomes 50 minus 30, which equals 20.
Therefore there are 20 friends sitting
between P and Q. Correct answer B 20.
Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.